every human being starts out the same
way two cells one from each parent found
each other became one and that one cell
reproduced itself dividing and dividing
and dividing until there were ten
trillion of them you realize there's
more cells in one person's body than our
stars in the Milky Way but those 10
trillion cells aren't just sitting there
in a big pile don't make for a pretty
boring human being so what is it that
says a nose is a nose and toes his toes
what is it that says this is bone and
this is brain and this is hard this is a
little thing in the back ear throat you
can never remember the name of
everything that you are or ever will be
made of starts as a tiny book of
instructions found at each and every
cell every time your body wants to make
something it goes back to the
instruction book looks it up and puts it
together so how does one cell hold all
that information let's get small I mean
really small smaller than the tip of a
sewing needle then we can take a journey
inside a single cell to find out what
makes up the book of you your genome the
first thing we see isn't the whole
genome all your DNA is contained inside
its own tiny compartment called the
nucleus if we stretched out all the DNA
in this one cell into a single thread
it'll be over three feet long we have to
make it fit in a tiny compartment that's
a million times smaller we could just
bunch it up like Christmas lights but I
could get messy we need some
organization first the long thread of
DNA wraps around proteins clustering to
little beads called nucleosomes which
end up looking like a long beaded
necklace the net necklace is wrapped up
in its own spiral like an old telephone
cord and those spirals get layered on
top of one another so we have a neat
little shape that fits inside the
nucleus Wow three feet of DNA squeezed
into a tiny compartment if only we could
hire DNA to pack our suitcases each tiny
mass of DNA is called a chromosome the
book of you would have 46 chapters one
for each chromosome 23 chapters of your
book came from your mom and 23 chapters
came from your dad two of those chapters
called X&Y determine if you're male XY
or female xx put them together we get
two almost identical but slightly
different sets of 23 chapters the tiny
variations are what makes each person
different it's estimated that all that
chapters together hold about 20,000
individual instructions called genes
written out all those 20,000
instructions are 30 million letters long
if someone writing one letter per second
will take them almost an entire year to
write at once but it turns out that our
genome book is much much longer than
just those 30 million letters almost a
hundred times longer one of those extra
pages for each set of instructions has a
few pages of nonsense inserted that have
to be taken out before we end up with
something useful the parts we throw out
we call introns the instructions we keep
we call exons we'd also have hundreds of
pages in between each gene some of these
excess pages were inserted by nasty
little infections in our ancestors but
some of them are actually helpful they
protect the ends of each chapter from
being damaged or some help ourselves
find a particular thing they're looking
for or give the cell a signal to stop
making something all in all for every
page of instructions there's almost a
hundred pages of filler in the end each
of our books 46 chapters is between 48
and 250 million letters long that's 3.2
billion letters total to type all that
copy you'd be out of for over a hundred
years and the book would be over 600
thousand pages long every type of cell
care is the same book but each has a set
of bookmarks that tell it exactly which
pages it needs to look up so a bone cell
resulting the set of instructions it
needs to become bone your brain cells
that read the set that tell them how to
become brain if some cells suddenly
decide to start reading other
instructions they can actually change
from one type to another so every little
cell in your body is holding on to an
amazing book full of the instructions
for life your nose reads nose pages your
toes are read toes pages and that little
thing in the back of your throat it's
got its own pages to thereunder uvula
you